Title: Efficient net-gain integrated optical parametric amplifier in the quantum regime
Authors: Yung-Cheng Kao, Jiaqi Huang, Ian Briggs, Pao-Kang Chen, Linran Fan
Categories: physics.optics, quant-ph
Published: 2026-02-05 18:30:05+00:00
Abstract: Optical parametric amplifiers (OPAs) are promising to overcome the wavelength coverage and noise limitations in conventional optical amplifiers based on rare-earth doping and semiconductor gain. However, the high power requirement remains a major obstacle to the widespread use of OPAs. Integrated OPAs can in principle improve the pump efficiency with tight mode confinement; however, challenges associated with propagation loss, limited nonlinearity, and susceptibility to nanoscale fabrication imperfections prevent them from competing with conventional bulk and fiber-based OPAs. Here, we demonstrate a highly efficient integrated OPAs with continuous-wave net gain. The pump efficiency is improved by over one order of magnitude. Phase-sensitive gain of 23.5 dB is demonstrated, significantly exceeding previous integrated OPAs, using only 110 mW pump power and no cavity enhancement. This is achieved with parametric down-conversion in thin-film lithium niobate waveguides using the adapted poling technique to maintain the coherence of nonlinear interactions. Moreover, the high parametric gain exceeds fibre-chip-fibre losses, leading to appreciable net gain up to 10 dB. The 3 dB bandwidth is approximately 120 nm, covering telecommunication S-, C-, and Lbands. Quantum-limited noise performance is confirmed through the measurement of output field fluctuation below the classical limit. We further demonstrate that signalto-noise ratio in noisy optical communications can be increased by leveraging this efficient integrated OPA. Our work marks a significant step towards ideal optical amplifiers with strong amplification, high efficiency, quantum-limited noise, large bandwidth, and continuous-wave operation, unlocking new possibilities for next-generation photonic information processing systems.
