Title: States that grow linearly in time, exceptional points, and zero norm states in the simple harmonic oscillator
Authors: Philip D. Mannheim
Categories: quant-ph
Published: 2026-02-19 18:11:35+00:00
Abstract: The simple harmonic oscillator has a well-known normalizable, positive energy, bound state spectrum. We show that degenerate with each such positive energy eigenvalue there is a non-normalizable positive energy eigenstate whose eigenfunction is orthogonal to that of the standard energy eigenfunction. This class of states is not built on the vacuum that $a$ annihilates, but is instead built on the vacuum that $a^{\dagger} a$ annihilates. These non-normalizable but nonetheless stationary energy eigenstates are accompanied by yet another set of non-normalizable states, states whose wave functions however are not stationary but instead grow linearly in time. With these states not being energy eigenstates, the eigenbasis of the Hamiltonian is incomplete; with the full Hilbert space containing states that are not energy eigenstates. Thus each energy eigenvalue of the harmonic oscillator is an exceptional point at which the Hamiltonian becomes of non-diagonalizable, and thus manifestly non-Hermitian, Jordan-block form. Such non-Hermitian structures occur for Hamiltonians that have an antilinear $PT$ symmetry. As is characteristic of such systems, one can construct a probability conserving inner product that despite the linear in time growth is nonetheless time independent, and not only that, it leads to states with zero norm. In addition, as is again characteristic of $PT$ symmetry, these non-normalizable states can be made normalizable by a continuation into a so-called Stokes wedge domain in the complex plane. In this domain one has a completely consistent quantum theory, one that lives alongside the standard normalizable energy eigenspectrum sector. This thus not quite so simple harmonic oscillator provides an explicit realization of our general contention that antilinearity is more basic to quantum theory than Hermiticity.
