Title: QASMTrans: An End-to-End QASM Compilation Framework with Pulse Generation for Near-Term Quantum Devices
Authors: Aaron Hoyt, Meng Wang, Fei Hua, Chunshu Wu, Chenxu Liu, Muqing Zheng, Samuel Stein, Drew Rebar, Yufei Ding, Travis S. Humble, Ang Li
Categories: quant-ph
Published: 2026-02-05 00:16:35+00:00
Abstract: QASMTrans is a lightweight, high-performance, C++-based quantum compiler that bridges abstract quantum algorithms to device-level control and is designed for just-in-time (JIT) deployment on QPU testbeds with tightly integrated FPGAs or CPUs. We focus on achieving fast transpilation times on circuits of interest, we find more than 100x faster compilation than Qiskit in some circuits with similar circuit quality, enabling transpilation of large, high-depth circuits in seconds. Unlike existing tools, QASMTrans offers end-to-end device-pulse compilation and direct quantum control integration with QICK, closing the gap between logical circuits and hardware control enabling closed-loop optimization. QASMTrans supports latency-aware Application-tailored Gate Sets (AGS) at the pulse level, identifying high-impact gate sequences on the circuit critical path and synthesizing optimized pulse schedules using pre-defined robust circuit ansatz. Validated through integrated QuTiP pulse-level simulation, this is found to significantly reduce execution latency and can improve final-state fidelity by up to 12% in some tested circuits. QASMTrans further implements device-aware, noise-adaptive transpilation that uses device calibration data for circuit placement on high-quality qubits and can focus on the circuit critical path to reduce transpilation-pass time while maintaining comparable fidelity. Additionally, it introduces circuit space sharing via calibration-aware device partitioning, enabling concurrent execution of multiple circuits or shots on a single QPU. Moreover, QASMTrans is entirely self-contained and has no external library dependencies, making it easy for practical deployment. By combining fast compilation, pulse-level control, and noise-aware optimization, QASMTrans enables real-time adaptive algorithms such as ADAPT-VQE and ADAPT-QAOA.
