Title: High-quality single photons from cavity-enhanced biexciton-to-exciton transition
Authors: Nils Heinisch, Francesco Salusti, Mark R. Hogg, Timon L. Baltisberger, Malwina A. Marczak, Sascha R. Valentin, Arne Ludwig, Klaus D. Jöns, Richard J. Warburton, Stefan Schumacher
Categories: quant-ph, cond-mat.mes-hall
Published: 2026-02-20 11:35:15+00:00
Abstract: Resonant laser excitation of a two-level system with subsequent single-photon emission can be used to generate single photons with high indistinguishability or Hong-Ou-Mandel (HOM) visibility. However, spectral overlap between excitation laser and emitted photons generally poses significant challenges. Furthermore, emitter re-excitation intrinsically limits achievable single-photon purity. Established solutions mitigate these issues at significant cost to source efficiency and with increased source complexity. This motivates the use of few-level systems with spectral separation of excitation and emission pathways. One option is a three-level cascade. However, without targeted lifetime engineering of emitting states, the cascade naturally limits achievable photon indistinguishability. Here we study a semiconductor quantum dot with resonant and selective cavity-enhancement of biexciton-to-exciton transition. Following resonant two-photon excitation of the biexciton state, we collect the emitted single photon with the cavity. This approach circumvents emitter re-excitation and naturally introduces spectral separation of excitation laser and emitted single photon. Supported by first experimental results, we demonstrate theoretically that with selective Purcell enhancement, the observed quality quantifiers of single-photon emission (purity, equivalently $g^{(2)}(0)$, and HOM visibility $\mathcal{V}$, equivalently indistinguishability) are competitive with respect to high-quality deterministic quantum-dot single-photon sources. This is already achieved without systematic optimization or targeted system engineering, which firmly places the reported approach as a viable route to the next generation of highest-quality quantum-dot based deterministic single-photon sources.
