Title: Polariton-polariton coherent coupling in a molecular spin-superconductor chip
Authors: Carolina del Río, Marcos Rubín-Osanz, David Rodriguez, Sebastián Roca-Jerat, María Carmen Pallarés, J. Alejandro de Sousa, Paweł Pakulski, José Luis García Palacios, Daniel Granados, Dawid Pinkowicz, Núria Crivillers, Anabel Lostao, David Zueco, Alicia Gomez, Fernando Luis
Categories: quant-ph, cond-mat.mes-hall
Published: 2026-02-20 09:48:07+00:00
Abstract: The ability to establish coherent communication channels is key for scaling up quantum devices. Here, we engineer interactions between distant polaritons, hybrid spin-photon excitations formed at different lumped-element superconducting resonators within a chip. The chip consists of several resonator pairs, slightly detuned in frequency to make them addressable, capacitively coupled within each pair and inductively coupled to a common readout line. They interact locally with samples of PTMr and Tripak$^{-}$ organic free radicals, deposited onto their inductors, which provide model $S = 1/2$, $g \simeq 2$ spin ensembles. Frequency-dependent microwave transmission experiments, performed at very low temperatures, measure polariton frequencies as a function of magnetic field in different scenarios. When only one resonator within a pair hosts a molecular sample, the results evidence that spins couple remotely to the empty LER as well as to the local cavity mode. If both resonators interact with a spin ensemble, the magnetic field tunes the polariton frequencies relative to each other, on account of the different spin-photon interactions at each LER. When polaritons are brought into mutual resonance, an avoided level crossing emerges that gives direct spectroscopic evidence for a coherent polariton-polariton interaction mediated by the circuit. Pump-probe experiments reveal that the excitation of a polariton within a connected pair is felt, thus it can be read out, by the other one. These observations, backed by model calculations, illustrate the control and detection of distant photon-photon and spin-spin correlations and entanglement in a scalable modular chip.
