Title: Non-Hermitian Renormalization Group from a Few-Body Perspective
Authors: Hiroyuki Tajima, Masaya Nakagawa, Haozhao Liang, Masahito Ueda
Categories: quant-ph, cond-mat.quant-gas, cond-mat.str-el, nucl-th
Published: 2026-02-09 14:19:15+00:00
Abstract: Non-Hermiticity plays a fundamental role in open quantum systems and describes a wide variety of effects of interactions with environments, including quantum measurement. However, understanding its consequences in strongly interacting systems is still elusive due to the interplay between non-perturbative strong correlations and non-Hermiticity. While the Wilsonian renormalization group (RG) method has been applied to tackle this problem, its foundation, based on the existence of the partition function, is ill-defined. In this paper, we establish a microscopic foundation of the non-Hermitian RG method from a few-body perspective. We show that the invariance of the scattering amplitude under RG transformations enables us to rigorously derive the non-Hermitian RG equation, giving a physically transparent interpretation of RG flows. We discuss a detailed structure of such RG flows in a non-relativistic two-body system with inelastic two-body loss, and show its relation to a non-Hermitian quantum scale anomaly. Our analysis suggests that non-Hermitian complex potentials often used in high-energy physics can be interpreted as being caused by quantum measurement, where the detection of elastically scattered particles updates the observer's knowledge, resulting in a nonunitary state change of the system. We apply our formalism to nuclear physics, find the emergence of a critical semicircle, and show that several nuclei are located near the critical semicircle in the coherent neutron-nucleus scattering. We also propose that the localized dineutron in two-neutron halo nuclei can be interpreted as the quantum measurement effect on the imaginary potential associated with absorption into the core nucleus. Our result bridges different contexts of non-Hermitian systems in high-energy and atomic, molecular, and optical physics, opening an interdisciplinary playground of non-Hermitian few-body physics.
