Title: Separating partially coherent light
Authors: Paul-Alexis Mor, Anne R. Kroo, Carson G. Valdez, Marko Šimić, Aviv Karnieli, Gabriele Cavicchioli, Zhanghao Sun, Vittorio Grimaldi, Shanhui Fan, Olav Solgaard, David A. B. Miller, Charles Roques-Carmes
Categories: physics.optics, physics.app-ph, quant-ph
Published: 2026-03-16 16:43:22+00:00
Abstract: Recent advances in optical imaging and communication increasingly involve high-dimensional, partially coherent light, creating a growing need for scalable tools to measure and manipulate coherence. Here, we demonstrate the automatic separation of spatially partially coherent light into "coherence modes" -- its orthogonal and mutually incoherent components. To make this separation possible, we exploit variational processing in layered self-configuring interferometer architectures in a silicon photonic circuit. This process formally finds and measures the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the coherency matrix, hence measuring the partially coherent state, while leaving it intact and separated after optimization. Furthermore, we show that mutually incoherent beams, if spatially orthogonal, can be automatically separated even if they are completely overlapped, hence separating unknown laser beams based only on their mutual incoherence. Our experiment finds and separates the two strongest coherence modes starting from a nine-mode sampling of the partially or fully overlapping fields from two independent lasers. The method requires a number of physical components that scales linearly with the rank $r$ of the coherency matrix and operates through a sequence of $r$ in situ gradient-based optimizations enabled by electronic drive frequency multiplexing of interferometer phase shifters. We benchmark its performance against a mixture-based tomographic method, also implemented on chip. These results establish a scalable framework for programmable coherence analysis and control in imaging, communication, and photonic information processing.
