Title: String-breaking statics and dynamics in a (1+1)D SU(2) lattice gauge theory
Authors: Navya Gupta, Emil Mathew, Saurabh V. Kadam, Jesse R. Stryker, Aniruddha Bapat, Niklas Mueller, Zohreh Davoudi, Indrakshi Raychowdhury
Categories: hep-lat, hep-ph, nucl-th, quant-ph
Published: 2026-03-25 18:21:30+00:00
Abstract: String breaking is at the core of hadronization models of relevance to particle colliders. Yet, studies of string-breaking dynamics rooted in quantum chromodynamics remain fundamentally challenging. Tensor networks enable sign-problem-free studies of static and dynamical properties of lattice gauge theories. In this work, we develop and apply a tensor-network toolkit based on the loop-string-hadron formulation of an SU(2) lattice gauge theory in 1+1 dimensions with dynamical fermions. We apply this toolkit to study static and dynamical aspects of strings and their breaking in this theory. The simple, gauge-invariant, and local structure of the loop-string-hadron states and constraints removes the need to impose non-Abelian constraints in the algorithm, and allows for a systematic computation of observables at increasingly large bosonic cutoffs, and toward the infinite-volume and continuum limits. Our study of static strings yields a determination of the string tension in the continuum and thermodynamic limits. Our study of dynamical string breaking, performed at a fixed lattice spacing and system size, illuminates underlying processes at play during the quench dynamics of a string. The loop, string, and hadron description offers a systematic and intuitive way to diagnose these processes, including string expansion and contraction, endpoint splitting and particle shower, chain scattering events, and inelastic processes resulting from string dissociation and recombination, and particle production. We relate these processes to several features of the dynamics, such as energy transport, entanglement-entropy production, and correlation spreading. This work opens the way to future tensor-network studies of string breaking and particle production in increasingly complex lattice gauge theories.
