Title: A Block Belief-Propagation Algorithm for the Contraction of Tensor-Networks
Authors: Nir Gutman
Categories: quant-ph
Published: 2026-03-02 20:23:14+00:00
Abstract: Simulating many-body quantum systems on a classical computer is difficult due to the large number of degrees of freedom, causing the computational complexity to grow exponentially with system size. Tensor Networks (TN) is a framework that breaks down large tensors into a network of smaller tensors, enabling efficient simulation of certain many-body quantum systems. To calculate expectation values of local observables or simulate nearest-neighbor interactions, a contraction of the entire network is needed. This is a known hard problem, which cannot be done exactly for systems with spatial dimension D>1 and is the major bottleneck in all tensor-network based algorithms. Various approximate-contraction algorithms have been suggested, all with their strengths and weaknesses. Nevertheless, contracting a 2D TN remains a major numerical challenge, limiting the use of TN techniques for many interesting systems.
  Recently, a close connection between TN and Probabilistic Graphical Models (PGM) has been shown. In the PGM framework, marginals of complicated probability distributions can be approximated using iterative message passing algorithms such as Belief Propagation (BP). The BP algorithm can be adapted to the TN framework as an efficient contraction algorithm. While BP is extremely efficient and easy to parallelize, it often yields inaccurate results for highly correlated quantum states or frustrated systems. To overcome this, we suggest the BlockBP algorithm, which coarse-grains the system into blocks and performs BP between them.
  This thesis focuses on: (i) development and implementation of the BlockBP algorithm for infinite lattices; (ii) using this algorithm to study the anti-ferromagnetic Heisenberg model on the Kagome lattice in the thermodynamic limit - a frustrated 2D model that is difficult to simulate using existing numerical methods.
