Title: Efficient construction of time-invariant process tensors for simulating high-dimensional non-Markovian open quantum systems
Authors: Émile Cochin, Jonathan Keeling, Brendon W. Lovett, Alex W. Chin
Categories: quant-ph, cond-mat.mes-hall
Published: 2026-03-06 20:02:43+00:00
Abstract: Numerical methods for obtaining exact dynamics of non-Markovian open quantum systems are mostly limited to either small systems or to short-time evolution only. Here, we propose a new algorithm for computing process tensors--matrix product operator (MPO) representations that capture the environment influence--which achieves greatly enhanced computational scalings with system size, while maintaining linear scaling with simulation length. We build on recent developments in the field which allow for long-time evolutions through process tensors which have a time-translational invariance. These can be built for general Gaussian environments and generic coupling operators with the system using infinite time-evolving block decimation (iTEBD). We introduce a modified iTEBD algorithm using intermediate compression steps which bring down the computation time scaling with system size $d$ from $\mathcal{O}(d^8)$ to $\mathcal{O}(d^4)$, as well as significantly lowering the required memory. To illustrate the power of this method, we apply it to the problem of dispersive qubit readout in circuit QED, which was previously out-of-reach numerically. The full treatment of the measurement resonator, which requires a large system space, combined with the long simulation times precipitated by the separation of timescales between the measurement drive and the environment dissipation, is now possible. The algorithm we introduce not only allows for capturing non-Markovian dynamics in large open quantum systems, but also further extends all the existing capabilities of process tensors, for example in quantum optimal control, or in computation of multi-time correlations or of steady states, to more complex systems with tens of levels.
