Title: Extreme (Rogue) Waves: From Theory to Experiments in Ultracold Gases and Beyond
Authors: A. Chabchoub, P. Engels, P. G. Kevrekidis, S. I. Mistakidis, G. C. Katsimiga, M. E. Mossman, S. Mossman
Categories: cond-mat.quant-gas, nlin.PS, quant-ph
Published: 2026-03-26 20:56:35+00:00
Abstract: In this Chapter, we review key theoretical and experimental advances in the study of extreme nonlinear wave events, called rogue waves (RWs), in both single-component attractively interacting and two-component repulsive mixtures of ultracold quantum gases. Starting from the exact rational solutions of the integrable focusing nonlinear Schroedinger model, the hierarchy of RW solutions is exemplified. These range from the Peregrine soliton (PS) and, related to it, the destabilization into a multi-peak cascade of PSs dubbed "Christmas-tree", to the Akhmediev breather, and Kuznetsov-Ma soliton as well as higher-order RWs. Emphasis is placed on their controllable dynamical emergence and characteristics in non-integrable quantum many-body systems described by Gross-Pitaevskii models and extensions thereof through different protocols such as modulational instability, gradient catastrophe, and dam-break flows. We further discuss how immiscible particle-imbalanced repulsive mixtures can be cast into effective attractive single-component environments capable of hosting RWs. Next, state-of-the-art experimental techniques are summarized within the ultracold realm that can be utilized to realize solitary waves, modulational instability, dispersive shock waves and RWs including the very recent first experimental observation of the PS, enabled through engineered effective focusing interactions and precise dynamical triggering. Observations of these extreme events in water waves, nonlinear optics and beyond are also outlined, highlighting their broader relevance and potential of emergence in disparate physical settings. Our exposition aims at showcasing ultracold atomic gases as versatile platforms for controllably generating and probing extreme nonlinear events, among others, in the quantum realm across integrable and non-integrable settings.
