Title: Partially Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computation for Megaquop Applications
Authors: Ming-Zhi Chung, Ali H. Z. Kavaki, Artur Scherer, Abdullah Khalid, Xiangzhou Kong, Toru Kawakubo, Namit Anand, Gebremedhin A Dagnew, Zachary Webb, Allyson Silva, Gaurav Gyawali, Tennin Yan, Keisuke Fujii, Alan Ho, Masoud Mohseni, Pooya Ronagh, John Martinis
Categories: quant-ph
Published: 2026-03-13 15:41:36+00:00
Abstract: Partially fault-tolerant quantum computing (FTQC) has recently emerged as a promising approach for the execution of megaquop-scale circuits with millions of logical operations. In this work, we demonstrate the strengths and the limitations of this approach by conducting quantum resource estimation (QRE) of the space--time-efficient analog rotation (STAR) architecture using realistic hardware specifications for superconducting processors, and compare it against the QRE of the full FTQC architecture. We show how the performance of the STAR architecture's protocols is affected by hardware improvements. We also reduce the space requirements for partial FTQC by developing a procedure leveraging code growth to decrease the size of a factory producing analog rotation states. Our results reveal a non-trivial dependence of the optimal pre-growth code distance on the rotation angle with respect to post-growth infidelity. Further, we analyze space--time trade-offs between the factory size and the error-mitigation overhead, and observe that in an application-agnostic setting, there is a Goldilocks zone for circuits in the regime of roughly $10^5$--$10^6$ small-angle rotation gates. We show that quantum simulation of 2D Fermi--Hubbard model systems is a particularly well-suited application for the STAR architecture, requiring only hundreds of thousands of physical qubits and runtimes on the order of minutes for modest system sizes. Due to its favourable algorithmic scaling to larger system sizes, utility-scale simulation of the 2D Fermi--Hubbard model could potentially be attained using partial FTQC.
