Title: Simulating dynamics of RLC circuits with a quantum differential-algebraic equations solver
Authors: Arkopal Dutt, Anirban Chowdhury, Kristan Temme, Hari Krovi
Categories: quant-ph
Published: 2026-04-29 17:54:52+00:00
Abstract: We introduce a quantum algorithm for simulating the dynamics of electrical circuits consisting of resistors, inductors and capacitors (aka RLC circuits) along with power sources. Given oracle access to the connectivity of the circuit and values of the electrical elements, our algorithm prepares a quantum state that encodes voltages and current values either at a specified time or the history of their evolution over a time-interval. For an RLC circuit with $N$ components, our algorithm runs in time $\textsf{polylog}(N)$ under mild assumptions on the connectivity of the circuit and values of its components. This provides an exponential speed-up over classical algorithms that take $\textsf{poly}(N)$ time in the worst-case. Our algorithm can be used to estimate energy across a set of components or dissipated power in $\textsf{polylog}(N)$ time, a problem that we prove is BQP-hard and therefore unlikely to be efficiently solved by classical algorithms. The main challenge in simulating the dynamics of RLC circuits is that they are governed by differential-algebraic equations (DAEs), a coupled system of differential equations with hidden algebraic constraints. Consequentially, existing quantum algorithms for ordinary differential equations cannot be directly utilized. We therefore develop a quantum DAE solver for simulating the time-evolution of linear DAEs. For RLC circuits, we employ modified nodal analysis to create a system of DAEs compatible with our quantum algorithm. We establish BQP-hardness by demonstrating that any network of classical harmonic oscillators, for which an energy-estimation problem is known to be BQP-hard, is a special case of an LC circuit. Our work gives theoretical evidence of quantum advantage in simulating RLC circuits and we expect that our quantum DAE solver will find broader use in the simulation of dynamical systems.
