Title: Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computing with Trapped Ions: The Walking Cat Architecture
Authors: Felix Tripier, Woo Chang Chung, Jacob Young, Safwan Alam, Bryce Bjork, Aharon Brodutch, Finn Lasse Buessen, Nolan J. Coble, Thomas Dellaert, Dmitri Maslov, Martin Roetteler, Edwin Tham, Mark Webster, Min Ye, John Gamble, Andrii Maksymov, J. P. Marceaux, Nicolas Delfosse
Categories: quant-ph, cs.ET
Published: 2026-04-21 14:02:12+00:00
Abstract: We propose a fault-tolerant quantum computer architecture for trapped-ion devices, which we call the walking cat architecture. Our blueprint includes a compiler, a detailed description of all the quantum error-correction protocols, a micro-architecture, a sufficiently fast decoder, and thorough simulations. The backbone of the architecture is a cat factory, producing cat states distributed throughout the machine, which are consumed to perform logical operations. The walking cat architecture is based entirely on a modern quantum error-correction approach called low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
  We identify promising instances of the walking cat architecture, such as (1) a simple architecture based on a single LDPC code, (2) a fast architecture based on fast logical gates relying on a [[70, 6, 9]] code, equipped with Clifford-frame tracking for any 6-qubit Clifford gate, and (3) a dense architecture based on a [[102, 22, 9]]] code encoding 22 logical qubits per memory block. Our dense architecture provides a design with 110 logical qubits executing about one million T gates per day using only 2,514 physical qubits. We estimate that the quantum Hamiltonian simulation of a Heisenberg model on 100 sites can be executed within one month with 10,000 physical qubits, including all shots required to achieve chemical accuracy, suggesting that such a device could enter the regime of classically intractable physics simulations.
  Our design relies on hardware components that have been experimentally demonstrated on small devices. We emphasize simplicity over hypothetical performance to facilitate the practical realization of this machine. Based on this approach, we believe that a fault-tolerant quantum computer with hundreds of logical qubits capable of running millions of logical gates can be built in the near term, providing a platform to explore a broad range of applications.
