Title: Light-Induced Quantum Self-Trapping of Vibrational Excitons in an Optical Cavity
Authors: Vincent Pouthier, Saad Yalouz
Categories: quant-ph
Published: 2026-04-07 17:47:51+00:00
Abstract: In an optical cavity, strong light--matter coupling between excitons and photons has been widely reported as a way to enhance energy delocalization through spatially extended polaritonic states. In contrast, leveraging cavity-mediated light--matter effects to promote the reciprocal phenomenon, namely \textit{energy localization}, remains largely underexplored. In the present work, we address this question by focusing on a special form of energy localization arising from nonlinear matter interactions: \textit{Quantum Self-Trapping} (QST). We employ a generalized Tavis--Cummings model to investigate the transport of vibrational excitons -- \textit{i.e., vibrons} -- between two anharmonic vibrational modes and examine their interplay with cavity photons. In the absence of a cavity, the arising of true and complete QST -- \textit{i.e.}, an infinite-lifetime localization -- is not possible due to the symmetry of the system. The energy transfer between the two modes still occurs, slowed down by the many-body interactions. Coupling the system to a single-mode cavity strongly alters this behavior, with two emerging regimes. First, at weak light--matter coupling, destructive interference between newly opened transition pathways suppresses energy exchange, leading to cavity-enhanced self-trapping. As the coupling strength increases, these interference effects evolve leading to cavity-assisted energy transfer, where we observe an acceleration of the vibrational energy flow. Most notably, we identify critical coupling strengths that separate both regimes in which the dynamics almost totally freeze, suggesting the arising of a ``stabilized'' light-induced~QST of many-vibron bound states. These results suggest that optical cavities can not only enhance transport but could also stabilize energy localization phenomena, providing a new route to control energy flow in quantum systems.
