Title: Schwinger-Keldysh Path Integral for Gauge theories
Authors: Greg Kaplanek, Maria Mylova, Andrew J. Tolley
Categories: hep-th, quant-ph
Published: 2026-04-29 17:52:04+00:00
Abstract: We develop the Schwinger-Keldysh path-integral formalism for open non-Abelian gauge theories that are gauge-fixed via the BRST method in covariant gauges. We focus on generic initial states, pure and mixed, specified at finite times suitable for non-equilibrium processes. We pay particular attention to the handling of the indefinite Hilbert space, the construction of BRST-invariant Schrodinger picture wavefunctionals, density matrices and inner product, the implementation of the Hata-Kugo prescription, and the role of boundary terms at both the initial and final times. We highlight the advantages of the Nakanishi-Lautrup field representation in dealing with initial/final conditions. The resulting Schwinger-Keldysh path integral is manifestly invariant under a diagonal (retarded) BRST symmetry for arbitrary physical initial states, whether pure or mixed. From this, we obtain the corresponding Ward-Takahashi-Slavnov-Taylor identities, valid perturbatively. Non-perturbatively the Gribov ambiguity is expected to break or modify the BRST symmetry. The naive advanced BRST symmetry is shown to be explicitly violated by the in-in boundary conditions. We show that the Feynman-Vernon influence functional derived by integrating out charged matter and/or hard gluon modes remains (perturbatively) BRST invariant. When the Open EFT action is expanded to second order in advanced fields it exhibits an exact symmetry under a contraction of the original BRST symmetry. This Keldysh BRST symmetry is equivalent to the BRST associated with the retarded gauge transformations together with a linearly realized BRST transformation of the advanced fields. These govern the structure of the leading terms in an Open EFT. We illustrate this with the explicit example of Hard Thermal Loop Effective Theory, and construct the general form of the Open EFT in a Higgs phase when all gauge symmetries are spontaneously broken.
