Title: Federated Learning with Quantum Enhanced LSTM for Applications in High Energy Physics
Authors: Abhishek Sawaika, Durga Pritam Suggisetti, Udaya Parampalli, Rajkumar Buyya
Categories: cs.LG, hep-ex, quant-ph
Published: 2026-04-17 07:31:14+00:00
Abstract: Learning with large-scale datasets and information-critical applications, such as in High Energy Physics (HEP), demands highly complex, large-scale models that are both robust and accurate. To tackle this issue and cater to the learning requirements, we envision using a federated learning framework with a quantum-enhanced model. Specifically, we design a hybrid quantum-classical long-shot-term-memory model (QLSTM) for local training at distributed nodes. It combines the representative power of quantum models in understanding complex relationships within the feature space, and an LSTM-based model to learn necessary correlations across data points. Given the computing limitations and unprecedented cost of current stand-alone noisy-intermediate quantum (NISQ) devices, we propose to use a federated learning setup, where the learning load can be distributed to local servers as per design and data availability. We demonstrate the benefits of such a design on a classification task for the Supersymmetry(SUSY) dataset, having 5M rows. Our experiments indicate that the performance of this design is not only better that some of the existing work using variational quantum circuit (VQC) based quantum machine learning (QML) techniques, but is also comparable ($Δ\sim \pm 1\%$) to that of classical deep-learning benchmarks. An important observation from this study is that the designed framework has $<$300 parameters and only needs 20K data points to give a comparable performance. Which also turns out to be a 100$\times$ improvement than the compared baseline models. This shows an improved learning capability of the proposed framework with minimal data and resource requirements, due to the joint model with an LSTM based architecture and a quantum enhanced VQC.
